A Beautiful and Wondrous Uḍumbara Garland
A Supplication and Summary1 of the Epic of Padma, The Life and Liberation of the Precious Guru
of Uḍḍiyāna
by Jamyang Khyentsé Wangpo

Namo Guru Deva Ḍākinī Hūṃ
Homage to the Guru, Deva and Ḍākinī! Hūṃ!

dechen shying shyuk gönpo ö mingyur
Protector of Unchanging Light, abiding in Great Bliss,
tsé dang yeshe nangwa tayepa
Longevity, Primordial Wisdom, Infinite Array.
tsen tsam töpé changchub lam na dren
At the mere sound of your name, beings are drawn towards awakening.
chöku öpakmé la chaktsal lo
Dharmakāya Amitābha: homage to you!

ngepa ngaden namnang rik ngé gyal
King of the five certainties and five buddha families,
shying dir sa chü wangchuk tsul tönpa
You display in our world your command of the ten bhūmis.
khorwa dong né trukpé tukjé chen
Great Compassionate One, you dredge the depths of saṃsāra.
longku chenrezik la chaktsal lo
Saṃbhogakāya Avalokiteśvara: homage to you!

ngotsar palden sangye pema kyé
Lotus-Born Buddha, amazing and glorious,
kyechi mi nga zakmé dorjé ku
With your pristine vajra-body free from birth and death,
dü sum gyalwa kün gyi trinlé dzé
You perform the enlightened activity of the Victors of the three times.
tulku pema jungné la chaktsal lo
Nirmanakāya Padmākara: homage to you!

denpa rangjung sangye ku nga chang
Naturally arisen truth, sovereign of the five buddha bodies,
natsok tab kyi semchen dé la kö
Through infinite methods you guide beings to great bliss,
duljé sampa yongsu dzok dzepé
Perfectly accomplishing all of their wishes.
kyeshi mi nga dorjé ku la dü
Vajrakāya non-arising and non-ceasing: to you I bow!2

ngotsar khyé pak dechen shyingkham su
In the realm of Great Bliss, supreme and magnificent,
öpakmé gön tötreng rik ngar trul
Presiding over everything, Protector Amitābha, You assume the fivefold form of the Skull-Garland
Buddhas,3
khorlö gyur gyal zangpo chok nyi la
Granting all bounty, all success and happiness.
pendé ukjin tsal la chaktsal lo
Cakravartin, Supreme Excellence: homage to you! [Chapters 1-2]

rik druk dön dzé drodul guru druk
In infinite worlds – Untainted Realm4 and others –
namtrul tsen gyé drimé shying sok su
You manifest as the Six Teachers,5 to tame the six classes,
drimé ma dang pema kyé zang sok
And as the Eight Manifestations, Untainted Speech and Lotus-Birth.6
do ngak tönpar nang la chaktsal lo
Bringing benefit to all, you expound sūtra and tantra: homage to you! [Chapter 3]

khyepar sang ngak tenpa kyangwé chir
You arise as the great Vajradhara, manifest in all five families,
dorjé chang chen rik ngar kur shyeng shing
To nurture the teachings of the excellent Secret Mantra.
jordrol chöpé rutra tul né kyang
Through union and liberation, with the taming of Rudra,
lamé tekpa pel la chaktsal lo
You achieve the propagation of the Unsurpassable Yāna: homage to you![Chapters 4 & 6]

naljor nüden dorjé yul sung sé
Manifesting as the thousand sons of King Dhṛtarāṣṭra,
sangye tong tsar wangkur lungten ching
You receive empowerment from the yogin Powerful Vajra,7Who foretells your awakening in the form
of the thousand buddhas.8
gang dul trulpé tenpa nyiden gyi
You appear in myriad ways as required for beings’ taming,
dütsi chö char wab la chaktsal lo
Raining down the nectar of the two-fold Dharma: homage to you![Chapters 7-8]

küntu changwé wang shyi chuwo pab
As Samantadhara,9 you give the four rivers of empowerment.10
tsukpü ri zang sé gyur ngak chö kyang
As the son of Excellent Crown Jewel,11 you uphold the tradition of Mantra.
trinden gyalkham do ngak tenpa yi
You work throughout all ages to tame the kingdom of Meghavat,
yündu dulwar dzé la chaktsal lo
Teaching with consummate skill both sūtra and tantra: homage to you![Chapters 9-10]

damchö khung tsün pakyul ling chen gü
There are nine domains in the noble land of Dharma.12
nubchok sang ngak jungné orgyen yul
To the west lies Uḍḍiyāna, source of the secret Mantrayāna.
rangjung heruka yi lhakhang du
There, in the Heruka temple, naturally-arisen,
khandrö trinpung trik la chaktsal lo
Clouds of ḍākinīs billow around you: homage to you! [Chapter 11-12]

chenmé jorden kor dzö chöjin dzé
The blind king, crazed by wealth,13 offers riches and possessions,
tayé trulpé ziktang sum la gong
And Amitābha sends you forth, his mighty emanation,Directing your attention to three particular
situations.14
drimé dangden dhana koshé tsor
At length, on Dhanakośa lake, immaculate and shimmering,
pemé bub su trung la chaktsal lo
You take birth in the heart of a lotus flower: homage to you![Chapters 13-14]

tong la rab gom indra bhuti yi
Perfecting generosity, King Indrabhūti
shyendön gyatso ché né norbu lang
Sets sail to find a jewel15 to benefit beings.
lam né chendrang ser trir wangkur shying
Sailing home, he meets you and asks you to accompany him.
pema gyalpor tsen sol chaktsal lo
They prepare a golden throne and call you Padmarāja, Lotus King: homage to you![Chapters 15-18]

yishyin trin lé dögü char chen pab
A rain of everything desirable falls from wish-fulfilling clouds;
daki chö ching deshek khandro yi
Ḍākinīs honour you, filled with devotion;
trulpé ku dang longchö dzokpé kur
Dākinīs of great bliss sing songs of praise at your enthronement
ngasol güpé tö la chaktsal lo
As Nirmāṇakāya and Saṃbhogakāya king: homage to you![Chapter 19]

jikten tsul dang tünpar jukpé chir
Aligning yourself with worldly conventions,
ö chang ma nyi tsünmor shyé né kyang
You take as your consort the princess Prabhāvatī,
khoryuk riwö khong kün dé shyi yi
And you make the whole kingdom splendid and abundant
paljor lhakpar pel la chaktsal lo
With wealth and glory, riches and enjoyments: homage to you![Chapter 20]

tönpa dorjé sempé lungten tar
As foretold by Buddha Vajrasattva,
gyalsi pang chir tulshyuk chöpa dzé
Your purpose then requires you to abandon the kingdom
dé la ten té khab né ngönpar chung
And engage in the practices of yogic discipline.
wenpé né su shek la chaktsal lo
You create the cause for expulsion from your homelandAnd depart in search of solitude: homage
to you![Chapter 22]

nga len yul gyi ka kyong drakpuk tu
In the cave in Pañcāla,16 Guardian of the Buddha’s Teachings,
dor ying lhatsok drubpé shyalzik shing
You accomplish the assembly of the Vajradhātu-Maṇḍala17And you meet the deities face to face.
silwé tsal jön dé jé tsekpar shyuk
Then, you travel to Śītavana18 and the Śaṅkarakūṭa Stūpa,19
khandro nam la chö ten chaktsal lo
And you teach the ḍākinīs the Dharma: homage to you![Chapter 22]

ga u shö jön jordrol ngön chepé
At the site of Ga’u Shö20 you practice union and liberation,
shorwa shyönnu shyé jar rabdrak shing
Gaining renown as Showa Shönu, The Youthful Who Escapes.
salden yul du drangsong si drub lé
Then, in Varanasi21 with the sage Arjuna,
tsi tsul rabjam sen la chaktsal lo
You master mathematics and astrology: homage to you![Chapters 22-23]

pema chen du tso jé shyönnü bur
In Padmāvatī22 with the son of Jīvakumāra,
sowa rigpa gyatsö ta ché né
You perfect the far-reaching art of medicine,
raga la yul kün gyi shenyen lé
And in Rāgala,23 with Sarvamitra,
dra dang yik rik shyé la chaktsal lo
You undertake the study of writing and grammar: homage to you![Chapters 24-25]

shyenyang bisho karma lasok lé
From Viśvakarma and other masters,
zo yi rigpa dza tsi yenché kün
You learn the skills of craftsmanship and the art of alchemy.
labpé tsul ten khepé tarsönpé
You bring all to completion, feigning study and training,
sheja tamché zik la chaktsal lo
And become a master in every field of knowledge: homage to you![Chapter 26]

khyepar lobpön prabha hati lé
You receive, from the master Prabhahasti,
naljor gyüdé kün sen ngödrub nyé
All the yoga-tantras, which you practice and accomplish.
küngawo lé ten la rabjung shying
Ānanda gives you teachings and bestows your ordination.
shakya sengé tsen sol chaktsal lo
Hence your name – Śākya Senge, Lion of the Śākyas: homage to you![Chapter 26]

tönpé lek sung tsennyi khorlo sum
You train in the teachings of the Three Turnings,
sang ngak chi gyüdé sum kün jang né
The excellent edicts of the Conqueror,And also in Secret Mantra’s three outer sections" –
gyalsé chö chok gyatsö parol sön
Perfecting, ocean-like, the conduct of the Victors.
changsem su mi tra la chaktsal lo
Bodhisattva Sumitra: homage to you![Chapter 27]

mang tö chok der ten nyi do dri shing
You seek clarification from the most learned ĀnandaRegarding the two doctrines of the sūtras.24
bé té yul du ku la dzokpar shyuk
At Vedalī,25 in the charnel ground Perfect in Body,
naljor chöpé drodul trinlé gyé
You engage, through yogic conduct, in the taming of beings.26
nyima özer drak la chaktsal lo
Renowned Nyima Özer, Rays of the Sun: homage to you![Chapters 27-29]

womin chenpor tönpa kunzang lé
In the Akanisṭha heaven, the teacher Samantabhadra
dzogpachenpo semdé rabjam sen
Teaches you the Mind Category of the Great Perfection.
lamé dorjé chang du tsen sol né
Thus you receive the name of Unsurpassed Vajra Holder
chökü yeshe nyé la chaktsal lo
And realize the primordial wisdom of the Dharmakāya: homage to you![Chapter 30]

khaché yul jön dechen dal du shyuk
In Kashmir, in the charnel ground All-pervading Bliss,
khandrö tsok la chö kyi khorlo kor
For the hosts of ḍākinīs there, you turn the Wheel of Dharma.
changsem chöpé shyenpen yongsu pel
Through compassion in action, you assure the welfare of others.
loden chok sé drak la chaktsal lo
Renowned Loden Choksé, Wise Seeker of the Sublime: homage to you![Chapter 30]

dorjé sempar mahayoga yi
From Vajrasattva you receive the Mahāyoga Tantras
tantra kün sen longkü tsal chen dzok
And perfect the great resplendence of the Sambhogakāya.
balpö yul jön lhündrub tsek su shyuk
From there you continue your journey to Nepal,Arriving at the charnel ground Spontaneous Mound.
sengé dra drok drak la chaktsal lo
Renowned Sengé Dradok, Lion’s Roar: homage to you![Chapter 31]

köpa lhündrub küntu changwa lé
In Spontaneous Present Array, Samantadhara teaches you
chi ti gyü sen rang gi tsen sol né
The Chiti Tantras of the Great Perfection, and bestows on you his name.
zahor yul jön langka tsekpar shyuk
Then you travel to Zahor, to the charnel ground Laṅka Mound.
pema sambhar drak la chaktsal lo
Renowned Padmasambhava: homage to you![Chapter 32]

ngotsar tulku garab dorjé lé
You are present when the amazing emanation Garab Dorjé
jampal shenyen chö sen kabsu shek
Teaches the Dharma to Mañjuśrīmitra.
dzogchen mengak gyü dang long dé sen
Together, you receive the Space and Pith Instructions of the Great Perfection.
tenpé dakpor gyur la chaktsal lo
Lord of the Dharma: homage to you![Chapter 32]

urgyen yul jön pema tsekpar shyuk
You reside in Uḍḍiyāna, in the charnel ground Lotus Mound,
rikden chenpor do dang gyutrul sen
And, from the great Kulika27 you receive the teachings on the Sūtra and the Web of Magical Illusion.28
liyul durtrö loka tsekpar jön
Next, you travel to Kothan, to the charnel ground Mound of the World.
dorjé drolö drak la chaktsal lo
Renowned Dorje Drolö, Wild Wrathful Vajra: homage to you![Chapter 33]

khachö né su lé kyi wangmo ché
The great Karmendrāṇī29, in the sacred place of the ḍākinīs,
zabmö wangkur tulkü tu jin tsal
Gives the profound initiations that transfer to youAll the blessings and power of the Nirmanakāya.
tukpo köpar dorjé chö rab lé
In Ghanavyūha, guided by Supreme Vajra Dharma,
wang shyi chuwo dzok la chaktsal lo
You accomplish completely the four rivers of empowerment: homage to you![Chapter 34]

khyepar ser ling wen kyong drakpuk tu
In the Golden Land30 within a solitary cave protected,
shrising hé rigpé tsal wangkur
Śrī Siṃha gives you empowerment in the display of awareness.
salé yul jön sang chen rolpar shyuk
From there, you travel on to the Sāla LandsTo the charnel ground Display of Great Mystery.
tötreng tsal du drak la chaktsal lo
Renowned Tötreng Tsal, Radiant Garland of Skulls: homage to you! [Chapter 35]

pakpa chenrezik kyi lungten né
As Avalokiteśvara foretold, you appear as Brahmā
riwo tsé ngar jampal shyönnu cher
To youthful great Mañjuśrī on the Five Peaked Mountain.31
tsangpar trul né tsi gyü tadak sen
There you receive all the astrology tantras,
jikten pendé pel la chaktsal lo
Thus increasing success and happiness for all the world: homage to you![Chapter 35]

shenpé drong jön rik tün tab kyi tul
You travel on to Butcher’s Village, adopt their behaviour,And effectively tame all the citizens
who live there.
pung lung nakpor drek tsok lé la kol
In the charnel ground Black Heaps32 you muster hordes of evil spirits,
tenpa sungwé tsöncha mangdu dzé
And furnish them with weapons to protect the sacred Dharma.
dorjé drakpo tsal la chaktsal lo
Dorjé Drakpo Tsal, Wrathful Vajra Might: homage to you![Chapter 36]

dhana koshar khandro wang du dü
When the ḍākinīs at Dhanakośa are safely under your control,
zahor yul jön ying yum mendarar
You travel to Zahor where you meet with Mandāravā.There, this mother of space all-encompassing
ngejung tu kyé kyé dün dzé chok nyé
Discovers the flesh of a seven-times Brahmin.33
ngotsar pakyé nang la chaktsal lo
Ngotsar Pakyé Nang, Infinite Appearances of Wonder: homage to you![Chapters 37-38]

lhacham rabjung dünpar kha né shek
Descending from the sky, how compassionately you care for her,This princess renunciant.
jesu zungwé gyal lön loktok gi
Yet king and ministers, driven by wrong views,
mér sek tsor gyur mejung dzutrul gyi
Throw you on a fire, which you transform into a lake.
shintu depar dzé la chaktsal lo
You inspire tremendous faith by means of such a miracle: homage to you![Chapters 39-41]

gyalsi cham dang kyé dün ku sha pul
The King offers you his kingdom, offers you his daughter,Offers you the flesh of the seven-times
Brahmin.
yul dé tamak pung chen tab kyi dok
You secure Zahor’s borders and teach The Ocean of Dharma,
ka dü chö kyi gyatsö khorlo kor
The Great Gathering of Transmitted Precepts.34
jebang mindrol dzé la chaktsal lo
Thus ripening and liberating king and subjects: homage to you![Chapters 42-43]

tashi drakpuk ma ra tika ru
In the Auspicious Cave of Māratika,
chimé gönpö jezung jinlab pé
Accepted and blessed by the Lord of Immortality,35
yabyum nyimé dorjé ku chok nyé
You accomplish the supreme vajra body of inseparable union.
tsewang rigdzin ché la chaktsal lo
Great Vidyādhara of Immortality: homage to you![Chapter 44]

ya ri gong shyuk mandhé zangmo yi
Residing for a while on the slopes of Slate Mountain,36
kyé gyü sungpé lü jin chö la kö
You tell Mandhebhadrā of her future lives,And faithfully she gives her body as an offering.Resolute
and firm, you establish the Dharma,
nya ngen mé tul chögyal chenpor gyur
Converting Aśoka into a mighty Dharma King.
gelong wangpö dé la chaktsal lo
Bhikṣu Indrasena: homage to you![Chapter 45]

bé té yul jön tsuk gü durtrö shyuk
You journey to Vedalī, to the charnel ground Nine Crowns,
ludrub jezung sherchin chen yang drang
Where, with Nāgārjuna, you reveal the Prajñāpāramitā.
shinga lar jön dzü kyé pakpa lha
You go to Singhala,37 to Āryadeva’s miraculous birth place.
lung tön mindrol dzé la chaktsal lo
Teacher, prophet, you ripen and liberate others: homage to you![Chapter 46]

bhanga lar jön ra dza drekden tul
Travelling on to Bangala,38 you tame the haughty king.
gyalpö shul zung chö kyi gyalsi kyang
Ousting him, you rule in his stead, securing the kingdom.
tokmé ché kyi ngönpé denö pel
You prompt Asaṅga and his brother39 to spread the Abhidharma,
tenpa gyepar dzé la chaktsal lo
Thus opening the way for the teachings to flourish: homage to you![Chapter 47]

dreden tsong dü dombhi tsen zung né
In the market place of Dhānya40 you take the name of Ḍombhi.
kyé dün drub nyé chang tsong bi na sa
With the flesh of a seven-times Brahmin you attain great accomplishments.
min ching drol dzé nyima tö la nen
Tethering the sun in the sky, you ripen the barmaid VinasāAnd secure her liberation.
gyalpor penpa drub la chaktsal lo
Then you render assistance to the King: homage to you![Chapter 48]

lar yang orgyen yul jön dü lön gyi
Returning in haste to Uḍḍiyāna,
mér sek chur gyur gyalpo lhakpar dé
You find evil ministers plotting to burn you.You transform their inferno into a lake,
tsombur ché la ka dü shedrub dzé
And you inspire the king with tremendous faith.You teach to the crowd The Gathering of Transmitted
Precepts,41
chok gi ngödrub tsal la chaktsal lo
And confer the supreme accomplishments on everyone there: homage to you![Chapter 49]

nga tub yul jön sau khya dewar drak
Known as Bhikṣu Saukhyadeva, you visit the land of drummers.42
kala siddhi yum ché drubpa dzé
With your consort Kālasiddhī, you attain accomplishment there.
hung kar jezung drubpé sa la kö
You nurture the young Hūṃkāra, and bring forth his realization,
chö kyi nang chen pel la chaktsal lo
Causing the radiance of the Dharma to shine: homage to you![Chapter 50]

khaché yul jön gyalpo dharmé rik
You travel on to the land of Kashmir,
lhacham dharma bodhi jinlab pé
Where you give your blessing to King Dharmāśoka’s daughter.Thus, to the princess Dharmabodhī
ngotsar tulku bi ma mi tra trung
The marvellous emanation Vimalamitra is born,
gyalkham chö la kö der chaktsal lo
And the Dharma is established within the kingdom: homage to you![Chapter 50]

zangling yul jön khandro düdul mé
You travel to Tamradvīpa, where you use the vidyā-mantra,43
rik ngak tok gi mutek ngabgya chom
Ḍākinī Tamer of Māras,44 to slam five hundred heretics.
ser ling gyalbu khyo shuk dzutrul gyi
In the Golden Land, miraculously you tame the prince and his wife,
tul né tubten pel la chaktsal lo
Causing the Buddha’s teachings to spread in all directions: homage to you![Chapter 51]

shyenyang kama rupa li yi yul
Further, in Kāmarūpa, and also in Khotan,
ma ru a sha dru sha sham bha la
In Maru, Aśadruśa, and likewise in Śambala,
shyangshyung ta zik to gar rukma sok
In Shang Shung, Persia, Tukhara, Rukma, and beyond,
chok ten gyepar dzé la chaktsal lo
You cause the supreme teachings to flourish and prosper: homage to you![Chapter 52]

mutek gyalpo lu yi khyabjuk gi
When the heretic king Nāgaviṣṇu takes control of Bodh Gaya,
dorjé den zung demchok dü nying trul
You appear as the emanation Saṃvarakālagarbha
mé yi tsarché lar yang nyampa sö
And you light a raging fire which burns the heretics to dust.Afterwards you restore everything
exactly as before.
tenpa lhakpar pel la chaktsal lo
Thus, peerless, you augment and expand the teachings: homage to you![Chapter 52]

detsé gang dul do jé tsen dang ni
In your taming of beings you have many vajra-names,
ku yi köpa chiryang nangwa té
Manifesting always in whichever way is needed.
pema dro gön tsal dang wangchuk gön
You are known as Mighty Lotus Protector of Beings,
drubpé lodrö drak la chaktsal lo
As Glorious Protector, and Accomplished Wisdom: homage to you![Chapter 53]

pema chemchok tsal dang khandrö wang
You are known as Supreme Mighty Lotus, Powerful Ḍākinī,
gönpo birwapa dang nakpo chö
Protector Virūpa, and Dark Black Conduct,
khyé'u chung khading tsal dang sara ha
As Mighty Youthful Garuḍa, and the great Saraha,
pema ngadak tsal la chaktsal lo
And Mighty Lotus King: homage to you![Chapter 53]

pema küntugyu dang chak chok tsal
You are known as Lotus Ascetic, Desire Supreme, and Mighty One,
pema drowé kyab dang trinlé gön
Lotus Protector of Beings, Protector of Enlightened Activity,
pema dön yö shyakpa ziji tro
Meaningful Lotus Lasso, and Radiant Splendour,
pema dombhi wa la chaktsal lo
And Padma Ḍombhi: homage to you![Chapter 53]

rikden chenpo pema karpo dang
You are known as White Lotus, Lotus with Skull-Garland, and as Padma Vajra.
pema benza pema tötreng té
You are known as all these noble ones, your twenty emanations.
dögur gyurwé trul tsen nyishu yi
In all these forms you shower on us
zabsang chö char pab la chaktsal lo
The profound and secret Dharma: homage to you![Chapter 53]

yang lé shö jön shakya dé wi dang
You travel to Yangleshö, where, with the consort Śākyadevī,
lhenchik chakchen chok gi rigdzin drub
You attain the supreme level of the Mahāmudrā Vidyādhara.
barché kün tul ter rik chobgyé kyi
Conquering every obstacle, you give secret teachings
chok sang drowa dzé la chaktsal lo
On eighteen supremely secret treasures: homage to you![Chapter 54]

tsawé shö dü sadak ché shyi tul
In the place known as Hot Valley45 you tame The Four Great Earth Ladies.46
sangwé dakpö lungten zabter nyé
You reveal a profound treasure, as foretold by Vajrapāṇi.
dorjé den du nyima sengé tü
King Sūryasiṃha welcomes you, receives you in Bodh Gaya,
tenpé dakpor ngasol chaktsal lo
Enthroning you as sovereign of the Dharma: homage to you![Chapter 54]

khyepar ngön gyi tukkyé dü minpé
Trisong Detsen, emanation of Mañjuśrī,
böyul jampal trisong detsen trung
Takes birth in Tibet based on his previous aspirations.
nar sön dampé rik chok yongsu sé
Reaching full maturity, he joins the supreme noble family,
chökhor shyengpar shyé la chaktsal lo
And develops the heartfelt wish to establish the Dharma in Tibet: homage to you![Chapter 54]

bö bang nam la lé tab dam ka kur
Requesting his subjects to decide on a site,
tsuklak shyeng sol bi jé saché tsal
The King sends the sage known as Birjé to survey the land.His purpose and intent is the construction
of a temple.
zahor yul né khenchen shyiwa tso
He invites Śāntarakṣita to come from Zahor
chendrang gyé shyin jal la chaktsal lo
And joyfully he welcomes the great scholar: homage to you![Chapters 55-57]

lar yang khenpö ngön rab lungten né
Again and again, Śāntarakṣita reminds the king Of the aspirations they made together, lifetimes
ago,
lobpön chendren ponya kyar té tang
And messengers are sent to invite you, the master Padmasambhava.
tsewé shyalshyé rim jön bö kham kyi
Compassionately you accept and make your way to Tibet,
lhasin dukpa tul la chaktsal lo
Taming countless gods and demons on the way: homage to you![Chapters 58-60]

tö lung dar jön shyongpé lha chu tön
Arriving at the Tolung Valley, you conjure the spring at Shongpé Lhachu.
zur khar chü dram chögyal khor ché jal
And on the river bank at Surkar47 you first meet the Dharma King.
chak la ma cham dorjé gur shyeng shing
His retinue is with him and, when he fails to bow,You sing vajra verses and display wondrous
miracles,
dzutrul tu yi dé kyé chaktsal lo
Inspiring great faith in his mind: homage to you![Chapter 61]

gyalpö gütü gyö shak chörten shyeng
Bowing low with devotion, and to show his contrition,The king commands that five stupas be built.48
samyé til peb ser trir shyabpé kö
Then, you are guided to the construction site of Samyé,49Where your lotus-feet are placed upon
a golden throne.
nyenkur cher dzé sa shyi jinlab sol
In deep veneration the king asks for your blessing
gyepé shyalshyé tsal la chaktsal lo
On the land, and with joy you fulfil his request: homage to you![Chapter 61]

sa né mé tsa mang shyeng lu ter chuk
You call for temples in key locationsAnd entrust the nāgas with the protection of Samyé’s wealth.
hepö ri tser drek tsok lé la kol
On the peak of Hepori50 you drag the haughty spirits there under your command.
kha la dorjé gar dzé dribmé sar
You rise into the sky and perform the Vajra Dance.Wherever your dancing shadow falls,
chakri mang ting dzé la chaktsal lo
The spirits gather earth and stoneTo be laid as Samyé’s foundation: homage to you![Chapter 62]

rirab ling shyi ling tren nyidé tsul
Samyé’s three storeys and surrounding templesAre a clear representation of our own world-system—Mount
Meru in the centre, then the four continents, Subcontinents, the sun and the moon,
and everything encircled
chakri lek kor jomo ling sum ché
By an outer perimeter, a ring of iron mountains.
nyintsen mi dang mi min tsok kyi tsik
Samyé is constructed by humans in the daytime and by spirits at night,
mi trul tabur drub la chaktsal lo
And all is accomplished like a magical display: homage to you![Chapter 62]

samyé chimpur lu dul gongpar shyuk
At Samyé Chimpu,51 in your wisdom you tame the nāgas,
ngadak jé dang drok drel ser mang pul
Thus forging a connection between nāgas and king.The nāgas, in turn, offer quantities of gold.
lhakhang chong dril gongpé tsal gyi tak
Under your guidance, the temple bell is hung, and
korsung nyerté dzé la chaktsal lo
You delegate spirits as the monastery’s guards: homage to you![Chapter 63]

lo ngé khong jong khenchen shyitso dang
Within five years, Samyé’s construction is completed.Then, together with Śāntarakṣita,
khyepar dorjé ying kyi kyilkhor du
By means of the mighty Vajradhātu-Maṇḍala,
lobpön nyi kyi rabné metok tor
You perform the consecration, tossing multitudes of flowers.
ngotsar samyé ten la chaktsal lo
Thus you reveal the amazing wonder that is Samyé: homage to you![Chapter 64]

shyenyang ra satra druk lasokpar
Next comes your consecration of the holy sites of Lhasa,Of Tradrug,52 and other places such
as these.
rabné tsal shying chökhor chenpo nyi
For all who come upon these great sacred places,
dreltsé dönden rab ngak nyenkur dam
Who consider them, praise them, revere or explain them,
sönam ta gyé pel la chaktsal lo
The merit of such beings will multiply beyond imagining.Homage, therefore, to these great places![Chapter
65]

lobpön nyi kyi chökhor lek drubpé
Having successfully turned the Wheel of Dharma,
lar la gyagar jön shyé ka nangwar
The two masters announce their return to India,
ngadak dungwé soltab shyukpar shyü
But the king, heartbroken, begs them to stay,
shyalshyé kadrin kyang la chaktsal lo
And in your great kindness you agree to remain: homage to you![Chapter 66]

gyalpö luk nyi trim kyi shyi zung té
The king, a great ruler, establishes the kingdom.
bai ro ka chok nam sum lungten tar
As foretold, he issues invitationsTo Vairocana, Kawa Paltsek, and Chökro Lui Gyaltsen.
chendrang lo tsa labpé khepar khyen
Trained as translators, they become rare scholars,
do ngak tokmar gyur la chaktsal lo
And they pioneer translations of both sūtra and tantra: homage to you![Chapter 70]

lar yang lo tsa gya dang gyé dü té
This gathering of the hundred and eight lotsawas,
sé mi dün dang gelong mi nga nam
The seven chosen ones53 and the five fully ordained ones –
rabtu jung né tubten dangpor pel
This marks the first triumph of the Buddha’s teaching,
tenpé shyima tsuk la chaktsal lo
And plants firm the stake of the Dharma: homage to you![Chapter 71]

denam gyagar chö tsol tangwa lé
Of all those who leave in search of the Dharma,
bai rotsa na lek drub ngön la tol
Vairocana and Legdrub are the first to reach India.
dorjé den du penchen nyishu ngar
In Bodhgaya they meet with twenty-five paṇḍitas,
chö kyi dütsi shyé la chaktsal lo
And from them receive the nectar-like teachings: homage to you![Chapter 72]

khyepar bai rö shri sim halé
Foremost, Vairocana receives from Śrī Siṃha
dzogchen sem long tsor gyur zab dön sen
The profound Mind and Space Sections of the Great Perfection.
kang gyok drub né bö du jönpar ché
He accomplishes ‘swift-footedness’, and makes preparations
tok jö gur du shyé la chaktsal lo
To return to Tibet, singing songs of realization: homage to you![Chapter 73]

tsenden ling du sadak jezung
In the Land of Sandalwood he keeps the local leaders safe.
chen trang dral né balpö yul du jön
He scales treacherous cliffs on his way through Nepal.
denpé tob jö gang kyi jikpa sal
Wielding the power of truth, he dispels a terrible blizzard,
samyé til du peb la chaktsal lo
And finally finds his way back to Samyé: homage to you![Chapters 74-75]

ngadak gyalpö chöné chok tu kur
The king holds Vairocana in highest esteem,
zab chö sen tsé dü lön trakdok pé
And from him receives profound teachings.But his ministers are evil and consumed with jealousy.
tsarchö shyüpar tsab ma chu la kur
Fearing a murder plot against Vairocana,The king himself pretends to drown him.
nyingjé mönlam drub la chaktsal lo
Thus, at great risk, the sovereign acts from compassion: homage to you![Chapter 75]

lar yang duk khang bé né chö senpar
Secretly, in his summer-house, the King continues to listenTo Vairocana’s teachings and profound
explanations.
tsünmo lönpö trik té nen solpé
But the queen and ministers hear of this and plot his excommunication.
mönlam dü bab tsawé rong du chuk
At their constant urging, Vairocana is banished,Exiled to the far-off region of Gyalmo Tsawarong.54
chok der tubten pel la chaktsal lo
There, he continues to expound the teachings,Stretching far and wide across the land: homage
to you![Chapters 76-77]

namkhé nyingpo lasok lo tsa nga
A group of five lotsawas, including Namkhé Nyingpo,55
pakpé yul tang lobpön hung kar lé
Are dispatched to make their way to the Noble Land of India.There, they are taught by the master
Hūṃkāra
yangdak drubpa shyitrö drub sen
On Śrī Heruka and the assembly of Peaceful and Wrathful deities.
kün gyi ngödrub nyé la chaktsal lo
In this way they each attain extraordinary siddhis: homage to you![Chapter 78]

pal seng ngön jön lam du kyen gyi shek
Returning early from India, and facing great obstacles,Langchen Palseng dies on the way.
ngadak nyün né chedu chendrang peb
Some time later, the sovereign himself falls sick,And the other four lotsawas are recalled to
Tibet.
namkhé nyingpö jinlab nyün dang shing
Namkhé Nyingpo conjures marvellous miracles
ngotsar chotrul ten la chaktsal lo
And, with the blessings of these, the king’s health is restored: homage to you![Chapter 79]

gyalpö nyenkur zab chö senpé tsé
The king praises Namkhé Nyingpo And receives his profound teachings,
tsünmo dü lön nam kyi barché tsam
But the queen and evil ministers start plotting anew.
lho drak khar chur shek shing drubpa dzé
They force his exile to Lhodrak Kharchu,56
ngödrub chok nyé dzé la chaktsal lo
Where he stays and practices and thereby attains the supreme siddhis: homage to you![Chapter
79]

ngadak chö chir tukgong mi jepé
Not yet content with the status of the Dharma,
tabkhé tsul gyi ten nyi dzukpar drak
The king, skilled in means, proclaims the establishment of the Two Doctrines.57
ka chok ma sum penchen chendrang tang
He dispatches the lotsawas Ka, Chog, and Ma58 to seek a great scholar,
serkyé drong du tol la chaktsal lo
And accordingly they journey to Kapilavastu: homage to you![Chapter 80]

pendrub ngabgyé tsukgyen bimala
Vimalamitra is waiting, crown jewel of five hundred scholars,
gyalpor ka trol chendrang nyurdu peb
And, with royal assent,59 he sets off without delay.
dzutrul tu ten ngadak rab dé né
Arriving at Samyé, he conjures wondrous miracles,Inspiring tremendous faith in the Dharma King60.
chöyön gyé shyin jal la chaktsal lo
They shower him with offerings and a joyous royal welcome: homage to you![Chapters 80-81]

shyenyang lobpön sangye sangwa sok
Another hundred great paṇḍitas are invited to Tibet,Including, among others, the great master
Buddhaguhya.
penchen gya tsa chendrang bön tön kuk
Their mission is to quell the bickering crowd of heretics.
nü dang tsöpa drenpé pam dzé dé
In debate and feats of power, they soundly crush these opponents,
chö kar nang chen gyé la chaktsal lo
Allowing the pure brilliance of the Dharma to shine: homage to you![Chapter 82]

bai rö yu dra chö chir shyu tuk tang
Vairocana sends Yudra Nyingpo to spread the authentic Dharma.61
lo pen gyal lön yiché lo tsa ché
Translators, king, and ministers know him as a great lotsawa;
chendrang tok jö sungpé rabtu dé
He inspires tremendous faith in them when he speaks of his realization;
ngakpé metok tor la chaktsal lo
And they shower Yudra Nyingpo with praise: homage to you![Chapter 83]

khen lob bi ma bai ro tsor gyurpar
The chief scholars there, Vairocana and Vimalamitra,
gyalpö depé nyenkur soltab shyin
Are greatly revered and trusted by the king.62
denö gyüdé gong drel dang chepa
At his request they teach, give translations and explanations,
gyur shé chenyen dzé la chaktsal lo
Inspiring all who hear them to take up the studyOf the tripiṭaka, tantras and commentaries:
homage to you![Chapter 84]

shyen jung men tsam pen jé kün kyang gyur
Translations are made of everything beneficial, Such as scientific texts on medicine and astrology.
tubten yongdzok lekbam trengwar pel
The complete and perfect volumes of the teachings thus unfold,Streaming forth – a garland of
the Buddha’s words,
chö ching ngasol rabné metok tor
Held in highest reverence, installed and established,And consecrated all around with flowers.
tashi getsen pel la chaktsal lo
Auspiciousness and virtuous signs increase in great abundance: homage to you![Chapter 85]

namkhé nyingpö chak la machampar
When Namkhé Nyingpo does not bow to the king,
lönpö tsok kyi tsewar tsampa la
His omission drives the ministers to the brink of revenge.
dzutrul tu ten sang ngak chewa tön
But the Secret Mantra yogi quietly conjures wondrous miracles,
dü lön pakong dzé la chaktsal lo
And brings down the demon-minded ministers: homage to you![Chapter 85]

gyalpö lo tsé kadrin jedren né
Remembering the great kindness of all these lotsawas,
denö dü tön shé dang drubdé tsuk
The King establishes holy days and study-practice centres.
nyenkur bang la chö kyi sol chen tö
Thus, he introduces his people to the ways and means of Dharma,
tenpa ta gyé dzé la chaktsal lo
And encourages the teachings to flourish far and wide: homage to you![Chapter 85]

samyé ku ten shyuk jang yiger tab
He installs statues at Samyé and has inscriptions made.
sung ten do ngak chö kyi gyur jang kö
At his command, the sūtras and tantras, supports of enlightened speech,Are compiled into the
volumes of the Words of the Buddha and their commentaries{{The Kangyur (bka’ ’gyur) and Tengyur
(bstan ’gyur).
penchen nam la nyenkur cher dzé né
Then the great scholars, amid resounding praise,
rangné gyepar shek la chaktsal lo
Return contented to their homelands: homage to you![Chapters 86-88]

khenchen changchub ling dang lobpön ché
The Great Abbot63 remains at the Temple of Awakening64
samyé chimpur tukdam gongpar shyuk
While you, the master Padmasambhava, meditate at Samyé Chimpu.
zab chö lö khel mang sung pema sal
There, you bestow extensive Dharma teachings,
lobur shek la jinlab chaktsal lo
And, at the sudden death of Pema Sal, you restore her to life: homage to you![Chapter 89]

mi tak tam dang ma ong lungten ching
You give teachings on impermanence and tell the princess her future,
lhacham jung dang jung gyur kyerab tsal
Disclosing her past lives and those yet to come.
terchö gangzak tsennyi zabmö ter
You describe the various qualities of the treasure-revealers
bé tsul dorten sung la chaktsal lo
And the ways in which the profound terma-treasures are concealed: homage to you![Chapters 89-91]

denam dönpar sangye lama né
You recount the names of the treasure-revealers
dé ling bardu dü tak chepa dang
From Sangyé Lama65 to Dechen Lingpa,
shyarjung mangdu jungwar lungtenpé
And foretell the various ways in which they will appear,Based on their respective lives and
times.
ngadak gyepa kyé la chaktsal lo
Thus you spark tremendous joy in the king: homage to you![Chapter 92]

ter jin kyebur shyaldam nying tam shyak
You give heart-advice instructions to future treasure-revealers,
tertön tak tab ku sung tuk yönten
Expounding on the marks of their enlightened body,Expounding on the marks of their enlightened
speech and mind,
trinlé tsor gyur drubné lungten ching
And on the marks of their enlightened qualities and activity.You foretell the sites where the
treasures will be discovered,
tenpé peldrib sung la chaktsal lo
And you speak of the waxing and waning of the Dharma: homage to you![Chapters 93-96]

ngadak ngagu lön tsé ku shekpar
At the age of fifty-nine, the king passes away,
chushyir sang shying gyalsi kyang tsul dzé
A fact that you keep secret for fourteen years.Ruling the kingdom, you ensure in due succession
rimpar lhasé muné mutik tsen
The enthronements of the royal princes Muné and Mutik Tsenpo.
gyalsar ngasol dzé la chaktsal lo
And in each case you empower the newly appointed king66: homage to you![Chapter 97]

detar luk nyi kadrin samyé tar
Having shown infinite kindness towards both Dharma and society,
sin yul shek gong lhasé dukngal sal
Your intention is to leave for the Land of Rākṣasas.But, to ease the sorrow of the grieving
prince,67
ka dü nyingtik jön shyuk namtar sung
You give the Great Gathering of Transmitted Precepts,And the Heart Essence teachings, and your
own life story.
ukjin lhakpar tsal la chaktsal lo
Thus, you are able to soothe his despair: homage to you![Chapter 97]

lar yang lhasé dungwé shol tab kyang
Again bereft, the prince begs you to remain.
sin dul dü la babpé ma nang shying
But it is time to tame the Rākṣasas, and therefore you decline.
shyaldam chi dang khyepar shyibtu sung
You give instructions and advice, broadly and in detail,
dralmé jin lab shyalshyé chaktsal lo
Promising to everyone your constant blessing: homage to you![Chapter 98]

khyepar yo ru tra druk khyam tö du
High on the upper terrace of Tradrug in Yoru,
lhasé jebang lo tsa nyerchik sok
Before the assembled company of prince and disciples,And the twenty-one lotsawas, and countless
others,
düpa chimar ka dü gyatso yi
For the benefit of the future you disclose the teaching, The Ocean of Dharma, The Great Gathering
of Transmitted Precepts.
chökhor lhakpar kor la chaktsal lo
And you spin the ocean-like wheel of the Dharma: homage to you![Chapter 99]

detsé lhacham mendara ba nyi
At that very moment, the Princess Mandāravā
dzutrul tü jön gurü da tö dang
Magically appears in praise of you, her Guru.
tsen zang ngak shing kutsab yönten dang
She sings of your excellent signs and marks.In turn, you reveal the infinite benefitsOf praying
to your statues, your representations.
chinang shyal chem tsal la chaktsal lo
Then, you bestow your outer and inner testaments: homage to you![Chapters 100-101]

lhasé chok drub gyalpor rab tsewé
Lovingly, you give the prince the supreme accomplishment,
chö kyi gyalpor ngasol lungten ching
Foretelling how his sons will all become great Dharma Kings.
kyewa dünpar uk yung penyön tsal
You also share the healing and beneficial relicsFrom the flesh of the seven-times Brahmin.
tukgong dzokpar dzé la chaktsal lo
Thus you satisfy all wishes and desires: homage to you![Chapter 102]

tsen tang lhakhang ngang junggyal mo la
At the Tsenthang Temple, you give to Queen Ngak Chung
zabtri sung shing shel gyi drakpuk tu
Your profound mind instructions. And, at Crystal Cave,
tsogyal tashi khyi'u dren shyüpé ngor
At their constant questioning, you effortlessly give guidance
shyaldam lhukpar tsal la chaktsal lo
To Yeshé Tsogyal and Tashi Kyidren: homage to you![Chapter 103]

né der gyalpo lu dang za nam dü
You meet in sacred places with gyalpos, nāgas, and planetary spirits.
zil nen tsang drü damshyak soknying lang
You overpower them, reveal their faults,Bind them under oath, and take away their life-force.
tenpa sungwar nyerté ma ong ché
Entrusting such spirits to safeguard the teachings for the future,
ngönchö rabjam tsal la chaktsal lo
You engage in countless ferocious activities: homage to you![Chapter 104]

lhasé gyalpor shyal chem shyib tsal tar
Having imparted your last testament to the prince,
nyurdu sin yul jönpar ka tsalpé
You announce your departure for the Land of Rākṣasas.
pal gyi jorpé chö ching nga drö tang
Receiving abundant offerings, you set out at dawn,
zur khar tsal du peb la chaktsal lo
Quickly reaching your destination, the forest at Zur Kar: homage to you![Chapter 105]

der ni gyal lön bang ché kyelmar dü
There, your disciples, the king, ministers, and others,
tsok chö sungwar soltab rik druk gi
Request you to expound the Dharma one more time.
dukngal lé tsam ngejung chö la kul
You begin with the suffering inherent in the six realms,Inspiring renunciation and a yearning
to practice.
lam zab nyingpo tsal la chaktsal lo
Thus you grant them the essence of the profound path: homage to you![Chapter 106]

lhaden né jön jo shaka tenshyuk dzé
Then, travelling through Lhasa, you bless the Jowo Śākyamuni,
gyal lön rabjung ngak men tsipa dang
Accompanied by quite a crowd – the king and ministers,Tantric practitioners, physicians and,
astrologers,
jindak pomö tsok kyi shyab kyel ché
And countless sponsors, both men and women.
palmo pal tang peb la chaktsal lo
This is how you reach the plain of Palmo Palthang: homage to you![Chapter 107]

düpar tukjé chenpö gom lung dang
There, with great compassion, you give meditation instructions
sosö lo dang tsampé shyaldam tsal
Suited to the individual minds of the audience.
tünmong tral yün labja gyepar sung
You give all-embracing advice, for now and the future,
kün yitsim par dzé la chaktsal lo
Fulfilling all wishes and desires: homage to you![Chapter 107]

lar yang dungwé shol tab ma nang té
Again filled with sorrow, they beg you to remain.
gung tangla khar khandrö suwa ché
However, you decline and, at the Gungtang Pass, Surrounded by a host of welcoming ḍākinīs,
namkhar pak shing dorjé gur lu sung
You rise into the sky, singing vajra songs.
dralmé shyalshyé nang la chaktsal lo
You make the promise to allThat you will never be far from them: homage to you![Chapter 107]

pawo dé shyi chib kyi na drang té
Mounted on your horse, with the ḍākas as your escort,68
ja trin lam lé lok tar nyurwa yi
Amid a swirl of rainbow clouds, swift as a lightning flash,
singha la gyü lhonub ngayab ling
You cross the island of Siṅgala to southwestern Cāmaradvīpa.
sinpo dulwar shek la chaktsal lo
That is how you leave in search of the hordes of rākṣasas: homage to you![Chapter 107]

gang der tar lam lhündrub rigdzin ché
There, the path perfected,Spontaneously-accomplished Vidyādhara,
raksha tötreng tsal gyi kur shyeng né
You assume the skull-garland form of Rakṣa Tötreng Tsal.
jisi khorwa matongwar nyi du
From there, for as long as saṃsāra still remains,
shyendön khakhyab nang la chaktsal lo
You will continue to send forth your endless emanations,Pervading all of space, bringing benefit
to beings: homage to you![Chapter 107]

bö kham dü sum küntu kyangpa der
In the land of Tibet, protected throughout the three times,
yangchen trulpé mögü dung yang ché
This emanation of Sarasvatī,69 with melodious yearning and devotion,
namtar gyatsö ka du tarchin né
Has compiled this biography of your life and liberation,This ocean of gathered teachings of
Padmasambhava,
trinlé lhakpar pel la chaktsal lo
As the source for the blossoming of your enlightened activity: homage to you![Chapter 108]

ku sum tsul tön ten nyi drönmé bar
You reveal the three kāyas, you light the beacon of the twofold teachings.
dzam ling chi dang gangjong drowé gön
Protector of all beings throughout the Snow Land and all worlds,
namtar trinlé ngotsar sam mikhyab
The enlightened activity of your life and liberationIs utterly inconceivable and marvellous
to behold.
guru rinpoche la gü chaktsal
Guru Rinpoche, in devotion, homage to you!

nöchü paljor ngö sham yitrul dang
With riches of the land and beings, material and imagined,
dakshyen longchö go sum gé tsok ché
The enjoyments of myself and others, and all our gathered virtuesOf body, speech, and mind –
kunzang chöpé trin tu trö jé né
With all this radiating forth as Samantabhadra’s offering cloud,
güpé bul lo tukjé shyé su sol
Devotedly, I offer it all to you.Please accept, and guide me with your love!

tokmé dü né marik trul wang gi
Since time without beginning, ignorance and confusion
tarpar drib ching khorwé gyur gyurpa
Have obscured liberation and are the cause of saṃsāric existence.
go sum gyi sak lé nyön dribpé tsok
I confess this hoard of evil deeds of body, speech and mind
nying né gyöpé shak shing chinché dom
And, with heartfelt remorse, I vow never to commit them again!

sishyi kham na namkar gewé tsok
Every drop of pure virtue in existence and nirvana
gyi dang gyi gyur dantar gyi nam dang
That has ever been, or will be, or is now being gathered,
mejung changchub sem nyi rab kyé ching
Is the fruit of cultivating the two-fold bodhicitta.
lab chen changchub chö la jé yirang
And so, in awe at the splendor of this bodhisattva activityI rejoice from the depths of my heart.

wangpor tsampé chögo rabjam dang
So that beings may be shown the countless doorways to the Dharma,
khyepar tsolmé ngepé tekpa chok
Especially the definitive vehicle of effortlessness,
dorjé tsemo drolwa drukden gyi
The vajra pinnacle that is adorned with the six liberations,
chökhor gyünché mepar korwar kul
I request you to turn unceasingly the Wheel of Dharma!

kyechi mi nga dorjé ku chok nyi
To the supreme non-arising and non-ceasing Vajrakāya,
loktok lo yi namyang mi dribpar
Utterly undefiled by ordinary confusion:
sipa jisi takten cher shyuk té
I beseech you to remain, until the end of existence,
khorwa dong né trukpar solwa deb
And dredge unobstructed the deepest depths of saṃsāra!

dakshyen drowé dü sum sakpa yi
All of the merit accumulated through the three times,
zakché zakmé gé tsok chichi pa
By myself and others, whether defiled or undefiled,
guru pemé gopang nyur tob né
I dedicate it now towards the attainment of the Guru,70
namtar trinlé yongdzok drub chir ngo
The complete and perfect accomplishmentOf all the enlightened activitiesOf his life and liberation!

gurü namtar dri lok changpa yi
For those who write, or read, or carry on their person
penyön dorjé den sung chichi pa
An account such as this of the Guru’s life and liberation,These true vajra words will bring
great benefit.
möden tsechik solwa deb nam kyi
Hence, filled with devotion, one-pointed, I pray:
gekmé nyurdu tobpar jingyi lob
Bless me, that I may swiftly be free from all adversity!

This prayer was based on the life and liberation of the Guru of Uḍḍiyāna entitled, Shingköma,
The Array of Pure Realms, by Minling Lotsawa Dharma Śrī71. Moreover, within this prayer,
Kunkhyen Lama Pema Ösel Donak Lingpa72 perfectly preserved the meaning of the Sheldrakma,
The Crystal Cave Chronicles,73. Thus this liturgy text is identical to the terma root text
of the Pema Kathang in terms of the blessings it carries. The three opening verses of homage
and the concluding seven-branch offering were written by Pema Garwang Lodrö Thaye74 in
accordance with the words of the excellent Guru himself. If you have faith and devotion
and you recite this prayer aloud, again and again, you will receive the exact same benefits
as you would from reading the extensive chronicles. May virtue increase!

| Lhasey Lotsawa Translations, 2016. (Translated by Kaleb Yaniger and Stefan Mang. Edited by
Libby Hogg.)

Version: 1.2-20220112
↑ The prayer summarizes every chapter of the Pema Kathang, the Epic of Pema, in one or more
verses. To clarify which verse summarizes which chapter, we have added the chapter numbers
in [chapter xx] below each verse. For an English translation of the Pema Kathang, see: Yeshé
Tsogyal, The Life and Liberation of Padmasambhava, Vol. I & II, (Emeryville: Dharma Publishing,
1978). For a Tibetan source file, see: Rin chen gter mdzod chen mo, (New Delhi:
Shechen Publications, 2007-2008). Some spelling mistakes have been corrected.↑ This verse
is the first verse of the Pema Kathang.↑ This refers to the five Buddhas of the five families
in the Saṃbhogakāya realm.↑ Untainted Realm (dri med zhing) is the name of another world-system.
The Pema Kathang recounts how Guru Rinpoche manifests in an infinite variety of
forms in infinite realms, the first of which is called Untainted Realm.↑ These are the six
Buddhas of the six realms.↑ Untainted Speech (dri med smra) and Excellent Lotus-Birth (pad+ma
skye bzang).↑ Yogin Powerful Vajra (rnal ‘byor nus ldan rdo rje).↑ The Thousand Buddhas
of this eon.↑ The All-Holding One (kun tu ‘chang ba).↑ The four (rivers of) empowerment
are: 1. the vase empowerment, 2. the secret empowerment, 3. the knowledge-wisdom empowerment,
4. the precious word empowerment.↑ ‘Excellent Crown Jewel’ (gtsugs pud ris bzang). Please
note that this is a very rough rendering of the Tibetan.↑ According to the Pema Kathang,
the nine domains of the noble land of the genuine and sacred Dharma (India), are: 1.
Bengal, 2. Vedalī, 3. Uḍḍiyāna, 4. Kashmir, 5. Zahor, 6. Khangbu, 7. Tamradvīpa and 8. Kāmarūpa.↑
This is a reference to King Indrabhūti.↑ These three places are: 1. Uḍḍiyāna and King
Indrabhūti, 2. the lake of Dhanakośa, and 3. Tibet and King Trisong Detsen.↑ Often described
as the wish-fulfilling jewel.↑ Pañcāla is an ancient kingdom of northern India, encompassing
the modern-day states of Uttarakhand and western Uttar Pradesh.↑ The Vajradhātu-Maṇḍala
consists of 37 deities. Its central figure is Vairocana, who is surrounded by the
four Buddhas, Akṣobhya, Ratnasambhava, Lokeśvararāja (Amitābha) and Amoghasiddhi. The Vajradhātu-Maṇḍala
appears in several tantras of both the Nyingma and Sarma Schools. For example
it is the primary maṇḍala of the Sarva-Tathāgata-Tattva-Sanṃgraḥ.↑ Guru Rinpoche prominently
visited the eight great charnel grounds, starting with Śītavana. Following the Pema
Kathang, the eight great charnel grounds are: 1. Śītavana, ‘Cool Grove’, in Magadha 2. Kula
Dzokpa, ‘Perfect in Body’ in Vedalī; 3. Dechen Dal, ‘All-pervading Utter Joy’ in Kashmir;
4. Lhundrup Tsek, ‘Spontaneous Mound’ in Nepal; 5. Lanka Tsek, ‘Lanka Mound’ in Zahor;
6. Padma Tsek, ‘Lotus Mound’ in Uḍḍiyāna; 7. Jikten Tsek, ‘Mound of the World’ in Khotan;
and 8. Sangchen Rolpa, ‘Display of Great Mystery’ in the Land of the Sālas.↑ This is famous
stūpa, located in the Śītavana charnel ground (next to Bodh Gaya), is mentioned in many
Nyingma Tantras. The stupa marks the place where the Kagyé, the Eight Pronoucements, was revealed.↑
Unidentified location.↑ The ancient city of Varanasi (‘Benares’)↑ At one time Padmāvatī
was a glorious city bristling with the spires and towers of stately mansions and important
temples. However, all that remains today are dusty ruins along the winding Sindh
River in Madhya Pradesh, India.↑ Unidentified location.↑ The two doctrines are the dharma
of scripture and the dharma of realization.↑ Vedalī has been variously identified with either
Vidarbha or Andhra Pradesh. However, as treated in Tibetan sources Vedalī should be understood
as a directional designation—in this case “southern”—rather than a regional one.↑
Lit. You engage, through yogic conduct, in the vast enlightened activity of taming beings.↑
An emanation of Vajrapāṇi, who taught Guru Rinpoche in the charnel ground Pile of Black
Clouds ( sprin nag ‘dus pa).↑ This refers to the Anuyoga root text, the Sūtra which Gathers
All Intentions, and the Mahāyoga root tantra, the Web of Magical Illusion.↑ The Ḍākinī
Karmendrāṇī or Khandroma Lekyi Wangmo (mkha' 'gro ma las kyi dbang mo)↑ The Golden Land (Suvarṇabhūmi
or Suvarṇadvīpa in Sanskrit, Serling in Tibetan) was a generic name used as a
vague designation for an extensive region, located to the east of the Indian subcontinent.
See: Nicolas Revire, “Facts and Fiction: The Myth of Suvaṇṇabhūmi through the Thai and Burmese
Looking Glass,” Mahachulalongkorn Journal of Buddhist Studies, 4 (2011): 79–80.↑ Wu
Tai Shan in China.↑ One of the minor charnel grounds.↑ A seven-times Brahmin is someone who
has taken birth as a Brahmin seven times in a row. Thus he is regarded as especially sacred,
with supernatural powers.↑ The Ocean of Dharma, the Great Gathering of Transmitted Precepts
(bka’ ’dus chos kyi rgya mtsho) is a teaching cycle that focuses on the Kagyé deities.
It was discovered as a terma-treasure by Orgyen Lingpa, who was the author of the Pema
Kathang, and it was subsequently rediscovered as a yangter by Jamyang Khyentsé Wangpo.↑ Amitāyus↑
Ya Ri Gong, the Slate Mountain, is referred to as Ya Ri Nag, the Slate Mountain Forest,
in the Barche Lamsel prayer. According to the Pema Kathang, Ya Ri  Gong lies within
the land of Kotala, bordering India and Zahor. While the original site, as recounted in the
Pema Kathang, remains hidden, Trulshik Rinpoche (1924-2011) identified a second Ya Ri Nak
in recent years, within the Kavre district of Nepal, also known as Timal, south-east of
Kathmandu.↑ The island of Sri Lanka↑ Bengal↑ Vasubandhu↑ Probably Dhānyakaṭaka (modern day
Dharanikota near Amaravati).↑ Short for The Ocean of Dharma, the Great Gathering of Transmitted
Precepts (bka’ ’dus chos kyi rgya mtsho).↑ While the biographies of Guru Rinpoche
do not provide us with the specific location of Ngatubchen, the land of drummers, certain
other sources indicate that this region must have been situated close to the Kathmandu valley.↑
Vidyā-mantras (rig sngags) are female deity mantras which bestow magical powers when
recited.↑ Ḍākinī Tamer of Māras (Ḍākinī Mārajitā, mkha’ ‘gro bdud ‘dul ma).↑ This is the
sacred site of Chumig Changchub also known as Tsawatshashö or Tsawarong in the Pema Kathang.
It lies in the Rikheshwor Jungle, near the village of Daman, 100 km southwest of Kathmandu.↑
The Four Great Earth Ladies (bdag mched bzhi); often also called The Four Great Earth
Ladies (sa'i bdag mo bzhi). They are four of the Twelve Tenma Sisters who confronted Padmasambhava
at Chumig Changchub in Nepal.↑ The village of Surkhar lies at the foot of the
valley running parallel and to the west of the Samyé valley. Between Surkhar and Samyé monastery,
between the Red Rock Mountain of Önphuk and the Brahmaputra river, there once lay
a beautiful forest of walnut, peach and willow trees. It was here that Guru Rinpoche met King
Trisong Detsen for the first time.↑ In order to confess his pride, King Trisong Detsen
built five stupas known as the Rig Nge Chorten at Sukhar Do. These stupas remain as a landmark
of the historical encounter between Guru Rinpoche and King Trisong Detsen.↑ Samyé Monastery
is situated in Lhoka, Tibet, on the northern side of the Yarlung Tsangpo Valley.↑
It was at Mount Hepori, above Samyé Monastery, that Guru Rinpoche together with his disciples
subjugated the negative forces that were impeding the initial construction of the monastery.↑
The caves of Samyé Chimphu represent Guru Rinpoche’s enlightened speech. Guru Rinpoche
resided in the Chimphu caves while Samyé monastery was being constructed, and he spent
long periods there in retreat. The caves are located at the head of the valley that runs
parallel and to the northeast of the Samyé Valley, about 13 km from Samyé itself.↑ Tradruk
in Yarlung is one of the border protection temples built by Songtsen Gampo.↑ The Seven Chosen
Ones or Seven Men to be Tested (sad [mi] mi bdun) were the first seven monks in Tibet.
They are: 1. Ba Trizik, 2. Ba Salnang, 3. Ba Trisher, 4. Pagor Vairotsana, 5. Ma Rinchen
Chok, 6. Gyalwa Chokyang, and 7. Khön Lü’i Wangpo Sungwa.↑ Gyalmo Tsawarong is a district
between Eastern Tibet and China – not to be confused with the previously mentioned Tsawarong
which lies in Nepal.↑ These five were: 1. Namkhé Nyingpo, 2. Epagsha of Drugu, 3. Vīra
of Rugyong, 4. Langchen Palseng, and 5. Gyalwé Lodrö of Dretsün.↑ Lhodrak Karchu lies in
Lhodrak County, just below Karchu, north of the Bhutanese border. It lies cradled at the
convergence of two rivers, the Kuru-chu and Tamzhol-chu.↑ Sūtra and tantra.↑ These three lotsāwas
were: Kawa Paltseg of Kaba, Chogrolui Gyaltsen of Chogro, and Rinchen Chog of Ma.↑
of King Indrabhūti↑ Trisong Detsen↑ Vairocana sent his student Yudra Nyingpo from Gyalmo
Tsawarong to Samyé.↑ Once everyone had witnessed the excellent qualities of his student Yudra
Nyingpo, Vairocana was requested to return from his exile in Gyalmo Tsawarong. Upon his
return, he and Vimalamitra became the chief scholars at Samyé.↑ Śāntarakṣita↑ The Temple
of Awakening is the name of one of the temples at Samyé.↑ Sangyé Lingpa (1000-1080) was the
first tertön, or revealer of spiritual treasures.↑ First, Guru Rinpoche appointed Prince
Muné Tsenpo as king. However, Muné Tsenpo was fatally poisoned and Guru Rinpoche thereupon
appointed Prince Mutik Tsenpo in his place.↑ Prince Mutik Tsenpo.↑ Lit. the four classes
of ḍākas as your escort↑ Yeshé Tsogyal.↑ Lit. the level of Guru Padma.↑ Otherwise known
as Lochen Dharmaśrī (1654–1717).↑ Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo (1820–1892)↑ The Sheldrakma was
named after its place of revelation, namely Sheldrak, the Crystal Cave. It is more commonly
known as the Pema Kathang, The Epic of Pema.↑ Jamgön Kongtrul Lodrö Tayé (1813–1899)