Guide to Narak Kong Shak
by Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo

When you practise Narak Kong Shak by itself, without combining it with any other practice, begin
by reciting the Seven Line Prayer and other similar prayers.
Then recite:
lama rigdzin gyalwa shyitrö kyilkhor gyi lhatsok tamché dün gyi namkhar bendza samadza
All the vidyādhara gurus and maṇḍalas of peaceful and wrathful buddhas appear before me in the
sky. Vajra samāja!
Then recite the eight branch offering “Dorje Lobpön Sangye Pal” three times.
Then recite:
semchen dé dangden gyur chik
May all sentient beings enjoy happiness!
dukngal kün dang dralwar shok
May they be freed from every kind of suffering!
dé dang taktu mindral shying
May they never be without joy and happiness!
chö kün nyamnyi tokpar shok
And may they realize the ultimate equality of all phenomena!
dza hung bam ho
Jaḥ hūṃ baṃ hoḥ
The sources of refuge dissolve into me.
rangnyi kechik gi pal dorjé sempé kur gyur
In an instant I am transformed into the glorious Vajrasattva.
With these or similar words, visualize yourself clearly as the deity who is the expression of
your innate nature.
om hung tram hrih a
Oṃ hūṃ trāṃ hrīḥ a
lhadzé dang ting ngé dzin lé drubpé chi nang sangwé chötrin ngowo yeshe kyi dütsi la nampa döyön
gyi trinpung zé mishepa kuntuzangpö chöpé namrol du gyepar gyur chik
Formed through the coming together of pure substances and samādhi, these outer, inner and secret
offering-clouds have the essential nature of wisdom nectar but appear as an inexhaustible
cloud-like gathering that includes every variety of sensual stimulant, expanding and
increasing until it becomes an immense display of offerings like that of the bodhisattva Samantabhadra.
Play music and recite the mantra for blessing the offerings.
nama sarva tathagaté bayo bisho mukhebé sarva takham utgaté saparana imam gagana kham soha
namaḥ sarvatathāgatebhyo viśva-mukhebhyaḥ sarvathā-khaṃ udgate spharaṇa imaṃ gagana-khaṃ svāhā
Then say:
rang gi nyingka né özer tröpé lama rigdzin gyalwa shyitro tsa sum chösung rabjam kyi tsok nam
dün gyi namkhar benza samadza
From my heart, rays of light shoot out to invoke the vast gatherings of vidyādhara masters,
peaceful and wrathful victorious ones, deities of the three roots, and dharma protectors in
the sky before me. Vajra samaja!
Now chant the first four lines of the practice, from “EMAHO CHOK  CHU  DÜ  SHYI…” to “…CHAK
CHÖ  SHYÉ” with the proper melody then play music. Continue from YÖNTEN  PUNTSOK…” to the
end of the Brief Fulfilment, following the instructions in the text.
At the end, recite the prayer of the Secret Vajra Knot (“LAMA  YIDAM…etc.”) and other prayers
of dedication, aspiration and auspiciousness.

Written by Khyentse Wangpo.
Maṅgalam!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2003.