The Heart of Blessings
A Brief Anthology of Prayers to Guru Rinpoche and the Twenty-Five Disciples, the King and Subjects
by Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo

Homage to the Guru!
Those who wish to pray in a concise way to the Precious Master of Orgyen and his emanations,
the five Tötreng families and eight manifestations, along with the twenty-five disciples,
the king and subjects, should do so as follows.
Taking refuge and arousing the awakened mind of bodhicitta
dak sok dro kün deng né changchub bar
From now until enlightenment, I and all sentient beings
könchok tsawa sum la kyab su chi
Take refuge in the Buddha, Dharma and Saṅgha, and in the gurus, devas and ḍākinīs.
shyendön dzokpé sangye tobjé chir
In order to attain perfect buddhahood for the sake of others,
mön dang jukpé changchub semkyé do
I arouse the heart of the awakened mind—bodhicitta, in aspiration and action!
3 times
The visualization
dün gyi namkhar yitrok chötrin ü
Before me in the sky, amidst a cloud of exquisite offerings,
rinchen sengtri pema nyidé teng
On a jewelled lion throne, lotus, sun and moon disc seat
tsawé lama orgyen rinpoche
Presides my root master Orgyen Rinpoche,
kudok kar mar shyön tsul ziji bar
His complexion white, tinged with red, he is youthful, majestic and radiant,
chak yé dorjé yönpé tö bum dang
In his right hand a vajra, in his left a skull cup with vase,
sangwé yum chok bé tsul khatam khyü
Embracing the supreme secret consort, concealed as a khaṭvāṅga.
ku la sang pö chögö zab ber sol
He wears inner gown, Dharma robes and brocade cape,
u la she ü nyen shyu tongdrol dzé
On his head the beautiful hat that liberates upon seeing;
shyabzung dorjé kyiltrung drangpor shyuk
He sits upright, his feet crossed in the vajra posture.

sang sum lé kyé jazer öpung long
From his secret body, speech and mind, amidst a mass of light and rainbow rays,
tötreng dé nga trulpé tsen gyé dang
The five classes of Tötreng, the eight manifestations,
tuksé mi je bang rik nyernga sok
His twenty-five heart-disciples, the king and subjects,
rigdzin lama gyatsö trinpung tro
And an infinite cloud of vidyādhara gurus, all stream out.
né sum dru sum tsenpé özer gyi
Their three centres are marked by the three syllables oṃ āḥ hūṃ, from which light beams out
yeshe chendrang nyisumepar gyur
To summon the wisdom beings, who merge inseparably one with them.
Visualize in this way.
Invocation
hung, shyeng shik pema jungné khandrö tsok
Hūṃ! Rise up, Padmākara, with your ḍākinī throng,
gong shik chok chu dü sum deshek nam
Care for us, sugatas of all time and all directions,
jetsün chenpo pema tötreng tsal
Great and noble guide, Pema Tötreng Tsal,
rigdzin khandrö né né shek su sol
Come now, we pray, from the sacred places of vidyādharas and ḍākinīs.
The wisdom beings are invoked, and dissolve into the visualization.
The seven branch offering
sengtri pema nyidé den la shyuk
Remain upon your lion thrones, your lotus, sun and moon disc seats.
go sum güpé chaktsal kyab su chi
With devotion filling body, speech and mind, I prostrate and take refuge in you.
chi nang sangwa lamé chötrin bul
I offer a cloud of offerings, outer, inner, secret and unsurpassed,
dü sum sakpé dikdrib tol shying shak
I confess and purify all harmful actions and obscurations of past, present and future,
pak dang sokyé gewar jé yi rang
I rejoice in the virtuous actions of both sublime and ordinary beings,
zabgyé chö kyi khorlo korwar kul
I implore you to turn the wheel of the teachings, profound and vast,
nyangen mida taktu shyuk soldeb
I pray that you do not pass into nirvana, but remain forever,
sönam ngö kün changchub chenpor ngo
And I dedicate all true merit to the complete enlightenment of all.
In this way, gather the accumulations.
Prayer to Guru Rinpoche, his manifestations and the twenty-five disciples
dü sum gyalwa kün ngö rik gyé dak
You are the embodiment of all the Conquerors, past, present and future—the lord of one hundred
buddha families,
trinlé nam shyi khorlö gyurwa po
You rule over the four enlightened activities,
nangsi wang du düpé tutob chen
You possess the power to magnetize everything that appears and exists,
pemajungné shyab la solwa deb
Padmākara, at your feet we pray!

dorjé rinchen pema karma dang
Vajra, Ratna, Padma, Karma
buddha tötreng rik chok nampa nga
And Buddha—the five supreme families of Tötreng;
chimé pejung padmasambhava
The immortal Padmākara, Padmasambhava,
loden choksé pema gyalpo tsal
Loden Choksé, Pema Gyalpo,
shakya sengé nyima özer dang
Shakya Sengé, Nyima Özer,
sengé dradrok dorjé drolö sok
Sengé Dradok, Dorjé Drolö and the like,
gang dul gyutrul drawé tsul changwa
Assuming every kind of miraculous manifestation needed to tame beings, and
kyabné kündü chok la solwa deb
Embodying every source of refuge: to you we pray!

sangye yeshe gyalwa chokyang dé
Sangyé Yeshé, Gyalwa Chokyang,
namkhé nyingpo jnana kumara
Namkhé Nyingpo, Jñānakumāra,
yeshe tsogyal palgyi yeshe shyab
Yeshé Tsogyal, Palgyi Yeshé and
palgyi sengé nam la solwa deb
Palgyi Sengé, to you we pray!

vairotsana chögyal trisong shyab
Vairotsana, King Trisong Detsen,
yudra nyingpo dorjé düjom tsal
Yudra Nyingpo, Dorjé Dudjom,
yeshe yang dang sokpo lhapal dé
Yeshé Yang, Sokpo Lhapal and
nanam yeshe nam la solwa deb
Nanam Yeshé, to you we pray!

palgyi wangchuk denma tsemang dang
Palgyi Wangchuk, Denma Tsemang,
kawa paltsek shübu palgyi seng
Kawa Paltsek, Shübu Palgyi Sengé,
gyalwé lodrö drokben lotsawa
Gyalwé Lodrö, Drokben Lotsawa and
drenpa namkha nam la solwa deb
Drenpa Namkha, to you we pray!

odren wangchuk maben rinchen chok
Odren Wangchuk, Ma Rinchen Chok,
palgyi dorjé langdro könchok jung
Palgyi Dorjé, Langdro Könchok Jungné and
gyalwa changchub gongpa ngöngyur pé
Gyalwa Changchub—you who actualized the wisdom mind of the buddhas—
tuksé rigdzin nam la solwa deb
Vidyādharas and heart-disciples, to you we pray!

solwa deb so orgyen rinpoche
To you we pray, Orgyen Rinpoche,
jingyi lob shik rigdzin trulpé tsok
Inspire us with your blessings, assembly of vidyādhara emanations,
chi nang sangwé barché shyiwa dang
Pacify our obstacles, inner, outer and secret,
sampa lhün gyi drubpar dzé du sol
Make all our aspirations be spontaneously fulfilled,
lü ngak yi la dorjé wang shyi kur
Bestow on our body, speech and mind the four vajra empowerments,
nedön dikdrib barché ying su sol
Dispel illness, döns, harmful actions, obscurations and obstacles into space,
ku sung tuk yön trinlé ngödrub tsol
Grant us the siddhis of enlightened body, speech, mind, qualities and activities,
namdrol ku shyi tobpar jingyi lob
Inspire us with your blessings, to obtain the four kāyas of complete enlightenment!
Pray like this with piercing intensity.
If you wish, at this point, you can recite 'The Prayer in Seven Chapters', 'The Prayer (to Guru
Rinpoche) That Spontaneously Fulfils All Wishes', 'The Prayer that Removes All Obstacles
from the Path', or any other prayers you choose.
The mantra recitation
As the ‘approach’ phase of the prayers, recite:
om ah hung benza guru pema siddhi hung
as much as you can, and then at the end:
Receiving the empowerments
rigdzin lamé ku yi neshyi né
From the four centres of the body of the vidyādhara guru,
özer jungwa dak gi neshyir tim
Rays of light streak out and melt into my four centres,
ku sung tuk dang yeshe dorjé yi
Instilling in me the blessing of enlightened body, speech, mind and indestructible wisdom,
jin gyi lab né wang shyi tobpar gyur
So that I receive the four empowerments.
Dissolution
tar ni tsok shying ö shyu rang la tim
Finally, the field of merit melts into light and dissolves into me.
tuk yi chik dré gongpé tsal chen dzok
The lama’s wisdom mind merges, one, with my mind, the great power of realization is perfected,
khordé ro chik ösal tiklé long
With samsara and nirvana one taste, within the all-embracing space of clear light,
dön nyi drebu minpé tashi tsol
Let all be auspicious for the fruition, the benefit of myself and others, to mature.
Receive the empowerments, and adorn the conclusion with prayers of dedication, aspiration and
auspiciousness.

In accord with the prayer of one with devotion, by the name of Nātha, this was written by Khyentsé
Wangpo, the favourite servant of the Lake-born Guru. Siddhirastu!

| Rigpa Translations, 2004

Source: mkhyen brtse'i dbang po. "o rgyan rje 'bangs nyer lnga 'khor bcas la gsol ba 'debs pa
mdor bsdus byin rlabs snying po" in gsung 'bum/_mkhyen brtse'i dbang po/. TBRC W21807. 24
vols. Gangtok: Gonpo Tseten, 1977–1980. Vol. 1: 271–275