The Flower of Faith
A Prayer to the Twenty-Five Founders of Buddha's Teachings in Tibet
by Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo

tsa sum kün dü loppön pema jung
Padmasambhava, embodiment of all Gurus, Devas and Ḍākinīs,
khenchen shyi tso chö gyal tri song shyap
Great Khenpo Śāntarakṣita, and the Dharma-king Tri Songdetsen,
nupchen sangyé nyang tön nyima ö
Nubchen Sangyé Yeshé and Nyangrel Nyima Özer:
ka ter shing ta nga la solwa dep
To you, the five pioneers of the kama and terma, we pray!

dorjé chang ngö la chen nyingpö shyap
Sachen Kunga Nyingpo, who is Vajradhara in person,
sönam tsé mo drakpa gyaltsen dang
Sönam Tsemo and Drakpa Gyaltsen,
sakya penchen pakpa rinpoché
Sakya Paṇḍita and Chögyal Phakpa.
jetsün gong ma nga la solwa dep
To you, the five founders of the Sakya order, we pray!

gyé dzé dorjé mar tön lodrö shyap
Marpa Lodrö, who is one with Hevajra,
milaré chen nyam mé gampopa
Great Milarepa, peerless Gampopa,
dü sum khyen pa dro gön sönam drak
Karmapa Düsum Khyenpa and Sönam Drakpa, protector of beings:
kagyü gong ma nga la solwa dep
To you, the five founders of the Kagyü tradition, we pray!

ö pak mé gön palden marmé dzé
Glorious Atisha, the same as Buddha Amitābha,
gyalwé jung né chen nga tsultrim bar
Dromtön Gyalwé Jungné, and Chengawa Tsultrim Bar,
rinchen sal dang shyön nu gyaltsen shyap
Potowa Rinchen Sel and Phuchungwa Shyönnu Gyaltsen:
kadam shé nyen nga la solwa dep
To you, the Kadampas' five great spiritual guides, we pray!

tenpé khorlo jétsün tsongkhapa
Venerable Tsongkhapa, who turns the wheel of Buddha's teaching,
gyaltsap chö jé khé drup gé lek pal
Gyaltsab, Lord of Dharma, and Khedrup Gelek Pal,
géndün drupa penchen chö kyi gyal
Gendün Drubpa and Panchen Chökyi Gyaltsen:
jamgön yap sé nga la solwa dep
To you five, the emanation of Mañjuśrī and his heirs, we pray!

dé tar solwa tap pé jin lap kyi
Through the blessing of our reciting this prayer,
dak sok tsering né mé chö shyin chö
May we and all others enjoy a long life, without illness, and may our lives be meaningful and
one with the Dharma!
yong dzin shé nyen chok gi jé zung né
By following these supreme spiritual guides, masters of all traditions,
nyur du changchup go pang top par shok
May we quickly attain the perfect state of enlightenment!

rimé tupten dzinpé dampa nam
May those noble ones who uphold the non-partisan teaching of Buddha
kal gyar shyapten trin lé chok chur pel
Live for hundreds of aeons, and may their activities increase in all directions!
géndün dé dang shédrup tenpa gyé
May the Saṅgha increase and may the study and practice of Buddha's teaching spread and grow!
sa sum tashi nangwé khyap gyur chik
May the whole universe and its three worlds be flooded with the sun-light of auspiciousness!

Inspired by a vision he had in a dream, the yogi Mañjughoṣa (Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo), one who
is completely devoted to the non-sectarian (Rimé) teaching of Buddha, composed this. May
virtue abound!

| Rigpa Translations, 1997.

Source: mkhyen brtse'i dbang po. "gangs can bstan pa'i srol 'byed chen po nyer lnga la gsol
'debs dad pa'i me tog rab tu rgyas pa" in gsung 'bum/_mkhyen brtse'i dbang po/. TBRC W21807.
24 vols. gangtok: gonpo tseten, 1977–1980. Vol. 1: 280–281