The Seed of Faith
A Prayer to the Sublime Ones
by Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo

namo gurubhyah
Namo gurubhyaḥ!
pang tok tarchin shyiwa chö kyi ying
Peaceful space of reality in which abandonment and realization are complete,
tsenpé palbar dechen longchö dzok
Perfect enjoyment of great bliss, blazing with the splendour of the signs and marks,
duljé kham dang tünpar trulpé gar
And dance-like emanations attuned to the temperaments of those to be trained—
ku sum namdren gyatsor solwa deb
To the oceanic guides of these three kāyas, I pray.

kalzang drönmé shyipa shakyé tok
Fourth light of this Fortunate Age, foremost of Śākyas,
mapam jampé yang dang sangwé dak
Invincible One, Mañjughoṣa, Lord of Secrets,
chenrezik wang tsokyé dorjé sok
Mighty Avalokiteśvara, Lake-born Vajra and the rest—
gyal dang dé sé nam la solwa deb
To the victorious ones and their heirs, I pray.

neten chudruk té rab nampa dün
Sixteen Elders, Seven Patriarchs,1
gyen druk lobpön sum dang rigdzin gyé
Six Ornaments, Three Masters, Eight Vidyādharas,
naljor wangchuk gyechu tsa shyi sok
Together with the eighty-four lords of yoga and the rest—
pakyul pendrub nam la solwa deb
To the scholars and adepts of the Land of Āryas, I pray.

gangchen tenpé sol jé nyingmawa
Nyingmapas, pioneers of the teachings in this Land of Snows,
yongdzok tenpa gyé dzé sakyapa
Sakyapas, who caused the teachings as a whole to expand,
tendzin jewé jungné kadampé
And Kadampas, source of many million holders of the teachings—
shenyen gyüpar ché la solwa deb
To these spiritual guides together with their lineages, I pray.

damé drubpé seng lam kagyü pa
Kagyüpas, unrivalled in their direct path to accomplishment,
zabgyé gyüdé ngadak bu dol nyi
Butön and Dolpopa, sovereigns of the tantra class, profound and vast,
jamyang chökyi nyima tsongkhapa
And Tsongkhapa, sun of Dharma and Mañjughoṣa himself—
gyüdzin lobmar ché la solwa deb
To these holders of the teachings together with their students, I pray.

shyenyang tsema dul ngön parchin dang
And I pray too to all the other great holders of the teachings
uma shyijé chöyul gyüpa sok
Of scripture and realization based on exposition and practice
shé dang drubpa la ten lungtok kyi
Of Valid Cognition, Vinaya, Abhidharma, Prajñāpāramitā,
tendzin chenpo nam la solwa deb
Middle Way, Pacification, Severance and the other lineages.

khyepar tönpa chok né danté bar
Above all, to that supreme embodiment of all the wisdom
rim jön gyüpé lama tamché kyi
Possessed by every guru in the succession of lineage teachers
yeshe chik tu düpé chizuk chok
From the Supreme Guide down to those of the present day—
tsawé lamé shyab la solwa deb
To my very own root guru, I pray.

detar miché güpé soltab tü
Through the power of praying like this with unwavering devotion,
si lé ngejung shyider machakpar
May I be inspired to renounce existence yet remain unattached to the bliss of quiescence,
jam dang nyingjé changchub sem nyi kyi
And, with love, compassion and the twofold spirit of awakening,
gyalsé chö la jukpar jingyi lob
Take up the conduct of the bodhisattva heirs to the victorious.

tsul né tö sam gompa tarchin shying
Inspire me to maintain discipline, perfect study, contemplation and meditation,
wang gi gyü min damtsik nampar dak
Mature my mind through empowerment, maintain pure samaya,
rim nyi lé jung lob dang mi lobpé
And realize the primordial wisdom of union through training
zungjuk yeshe drubpar jingyi lob
And through no-more-training in the two phases.

Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo, who was developed supreme purity of perception towards the teachings
without sectarian bias, offered this prayer. May it bring virtue and excellence!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2020.

Source: mkhyen brtse'i dbang po. "yul dam pa rnams la gsol ba 'debs pa dad pa'i sa bon" in gsung
'bum/_mkhyen brtse'i dbang po/. TBRC W21807. 24 vols. gangtok: gonpo tseten, 1977–1980.
Vol. 1: 278–280
↑ Mahākāśyapa, Ānanda, Śāṇavāsika, Upagupta, Dhītika, Kṛṣṇa, and Sudarśana.