The Chariot of the Vidyādharas
An Aspiration Prayer for Travelling to the Realm of Lotus Light
by Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo

om ah hung benza guru pema siddhi hung
oṃ āḥ hūṃ vajra guru padma siddhi hūṃ

mi shik tiklé chenpö yeshe ni
The wisdom of the great, indestructible sphere
ösal nyukmé kha ying drangpé ngö
Shines in the limpid sky of innate clear light,
zungjuk wangpö shyu tar ngön nangwé
And the unity of space and wisdom, like a rainbow, appears for all to see
nang shyin trulpé shying chok pema ö
As the supreme, naturally emanated realm of Lotus Light.

chönyi ngönsum ja zer tiklé long
In an expanse of rings of rainbow light, the direct realization of dharmatā,
nyam nang gongpel shyalmé khangchen por
Rises the great mansion, the increasing of experience,
rigpa tsepeb pawo daki tsok
Where throngs of ḍākas and ḍākinīs, awareness reaching fullness,
chö zé lodé dorjé lugar gyur
Enact vajra dances and song, the exhaustion of phenomena beyond the mind.

dé ü dömé gönpo ö tayé
In its centre preside the primordial lord Amitābha,
nyingjé terchen chak na pemo dang
The great treasure of compassion, Padmapāṇi,
ku sum kündü chimé tö treng tsal
And the three kāyas all-embodied, the immortal Tötreng Tsal,
gang dul trulpé tsen chok gyé la sok
With his eight principal emanations and others, all manifesting to tame beings each in their
own way.

tsen dang ku yi nam rol ta lepé
Here, in this gathering-place of the great magical net
gyuntrul drawa chenpö dün sa der
Of your infinite display of aspects and forms,
dakshyen khakhyab yichen gyatso kün
May I and others, the ocean of sentient beings pervading space,
tsé di pö ma tak tu kyewar shok
All be born the instant we depart this life.

der yang rikdzin nam shyi seng lam la
Once there, taking the special path of the four vidyādhara stages,
ten né ku dang yeshe gyatsö ngö
May we swiftly attain the level of the Lake-born Guru,
tsokyé lamé gopang nyur tob né
Who embodies oceans of kāyas and wisdom,
rangshyen dön nyi lhün gyi drubpar shok
And spontaneously fulfil the benefit of ourselves and others!

Jamyang Khyentse Lha, the venerable vidyādhara, expressed whatever came immediately to mind
on the tenth day of the month of miracles. Siddhirastu!

| Rigpa Translations, 2004. Adapted and updated for Lotsawa House, 2021.

Source: mkhyen brtse'i dbang po. "pad+ma 'od du bgrod pa'i smon lam rig pa 'dzin pa'i shing
rta" in gsung 'bum/_mkhyen brtse'i dbang po/. TBRC W21807. 24 vols. gangtok: gonpo tseten,
1977–1980. Vol. 1: 259–260