Wish-Fulfilling Feast of Siddhis
An Aspiration Prayer to Orgyen Rinpoche, the Precious Master of Oḍḍiyāna
by Jamyang Khyentsé Wangpo

sem kyi dorjé nyukmé yeshe ying
The ‘vajra nature of the mind’ is the space of primordial wisdom,
dudral ma mik pema tö treng dang
And inseparable from it in every way is Pema Tötreng Tsal.
yermé khyabdak palden lama la
You who are one with him, all-pervasive lord, glorious lama,
nyingné solwa deb so jingyi lob
From my heart I pray, grant me your blessing!

gang ku tongwé tamal trulnang gak
Simply to see your form puts a stop to ordinary deluded perception,
sung sang töpé dechen yeshe kyé
Simply to hear your secret voice arouses the wisdom of great bliss,
drenpa yi kyang sishyi jik trokpé
Simply to think of you snatches away all fear of samsara and nirvana
pa chik lama bö do tsewé gong
Lama, my only father, I cry out to you: think of me with love.

dak dang dak dré gönmé nyamtak dro
I and those like me, beings who are worn and weary, with no-one to protect us,
dukngal khorwé gyatsor jingwa la
Are drowning in samsara’s ocean of suffering,
gönpo khyö lé kyab shyen machipé
Since we have no other refuge or protection but you, lord,
namdak mönpé né di nyur drub dzö
Swiftly make this, our pure aspiration, fulfil its aim.

nekab nedön jungpö tsewa sok
Here and now, eliminate the harm caused by illness, döns, jungpos and the like;
damchö drubpé gal kyen kün shyi shying
Pacify all circumstances unfavourable for practising the Dharma.
tsesö paljor lungtok yönten sok
Increase our long life, merit, prosperity, the qualities due to study and realization,
tünkyen lek tsok gyepar dzé du sol
Favourable circumstances and everything positive and good.

tartuk ngejung jangsem tingné jong
Ultimately, grant us your blessing so that when we have cultivated a deep experience of renunciation
and bodhicitta,
nangdrak rik sum lha ngak chökur shar
And appearance, sound and awareness arise as deity, mantra and dharmakāya,
kadak lhündrub dorjé seng lam né
Then through the special vajra path of primordial purity and spontaneous presence,
chok gi ngödrub nyepar jingyi lob
We may attain the supreme among siddhis, enlightenment.

galté tsé dir drubta ma nyok na
If, in this life, I can not follow through to completion,
chiwa ösal dön gyi pema jung
When the clear light dawns at death, let me behold in it
ngönsum tong né dralmé kyangwa yi
The actual presence of Padmasambhava, and abiding there, inseparable,
rangshyin chökü ying su drolwar shok
May I be liberated into the dharmakāya space of the nature of all things.

der yang nyidzin trulwé shyenwang gi
But if, at that point, I fall under the control of dualistic delusion,
sipa bardö nangwa char si tsé
And the appearances of the bardo of becoming arise,
drinchen lama tsokyé dorjé dang
Then let the kind and compassionate lama, 'Lake-born Vajra',
pawo khandrö tsok kyi dün sü té
Come to welcome me, with throngs of ḍākas and ḍākinīs,
rolmö dra dang metok charbeb shyin
Amid the sounds of music, and a falling cascade of flowers;
bu chik pal gyi riwor tsur shok ché
Saying “Only child of ours, come now to the Mountain of Glory”,
ming né lungten sa la chöpé shying
Calling me by name, and leading me to this paradise on earth,
pema ö kyi drong du tripar shok
To the city of Lotus Light!

der ni rikdzin daki tsok nam dang
Once there, constantly practising the Dharma of the supreme vehicle of Dzogpachenpo,
lhen chik tek chok chö la tak chö ching
Along with the hosts of vidyādharas and ḍākinīs,
sang chen mindrol lam gyi tabkhé la
May I become skilled in the great secret path of ripening and liberation,
ten né ku shyi gopang nyur tob shok
And swiftly attain the sublime level of the four kāyas.

shyenyang rimé tenpa dar shying gyé
Then, may the 'non-partisan'1 teaching flourish and spread,
tendzin chok nam shyab pé kal gyar ten
May the lives of the supreme holders of the teaching be secure for ages to come,
bö kham dü kyi güpa kün shyi shying
May all the degeneration of this time in the land of Tibet be pacified,
dzokden sarpé gatön gyepar shok
And the joy and happiness of a new age of perfection increase and prevail.

dorna di né changchub nyingpö bar
Finally, from now until attaining the essence of enlightenment,
palden lama yishyin norbü shyab
May the feet of the glorious lama, the wish-fulfilling gem,
nying ü pemor dralmé tak shyuk né
Rest forever, uninterruptedly, on the lotus at the centre of my heart,
si shyi lek tsok gyepé tashi tsol
Granting auspiciousness so that all good things in samsara and nirvana increase!

Through the blessing of the great master of Orgyen who knows past, present and future, in the
natural gathering place of ḍākas and ḍākinīs, Drakmar Zangyak Namkha Dzong, on the upper
slopes of Tibet’s five-peaked mountain, while celebrating the tsok feast on the tenth day
of the waxing moon of the miracle month of the Male Iron Dog year (1850), called ‘the common
one’, the vidyādhara Khyentsé Wangpo, favourite servant of the omniscient Guru, made this
prayer, and may it be blessed so that it comes to pass exactly as it says. Sarva maṅgalaṃ!

| Rigpa Translations, 2004.

Source: mkhyen brtse'i dbang po. "bla ma o rgyan rin po che la gsol 'debs smon lam du bya ba
dngos grub 'dod 'jo'i dga' ston" in gsung 'bum/_mkhyen brtse'i dbang po/. TBRC W21807. 24
vols. gangtok: gonpo tseten, 1977–1980. Vol. 1: 261–262
↑ Tib. Rimé